---
layout: post
title: The Bitcoin Core Kernel
---

It has been nearly two years since I started working on the [Bitcoin Core
kernel library](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/27587) - a software
library encapsulating the Bitcoin Core validation logic, or all the logic
required to determine if a given block extends the current best-work chain.
The library purposely does not include any P2P networking, JSON RPC, REST or
ZMQ servers, a wallet, additional database indexes, or a user interface.
Originally [started by Carl Dong](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MdxIkH6GCBs),
it has been long desired by contributors and users of Bitcoin Core. He
originally introduced it as a de-spaghettification of Bitcoin Core's validation
logic into a more distilled, maintainable order that cleanly separates
validation from non-validation. The design of its API was left for a later
point in time.  Building upon this original work, the project is now at a point
where this separation is largely complete. It is now later.

In this post, I want to lay out my vision for its future. Articulating personal
visions for a project of this scope is dangerous. It may generate undue
influence and blur reality to resemble desired outcomes. Ideas should be able
to stand on their own merit and not on the hypothesized results. Disagreement
on even the details of these visions can lead to a hardening of dogmatic
opinions and make us inflexible to new data and arguments. My ego is not immune
to this. I had to concede bad ideas and abandon work that already cost me
effort over the past two years, and it made me upset. At the same time,
attracting people to your project requires you to share ideas and tell a
narrative. Not talking about goals is equally exclusionary. It makes it harder
for newcomers to enter and equally supports hidden agendas. People interacting
with the project are often left guessing what its goals are.

It may well be that none of the features I talk about ever ship. They are
equally likely to be overengineered, won't prove useful (or imo more
importantly fun) enough to other developers, or may have dangerous side
effects. The project has already been a success for Bitcoin Core. Developers
profit from the increased clarity of splitting validation from non-validation
code and it made the code more consistent compared to three years ago. Even if
it were never to progress beyond the current stage, it already provided
significant benefits.

The project has so far concentrated on cleanly separating Bitcoin Core's
validation logic from its non-validation logic. However, there are still some
bits left where functionality used by validation is somewhat duplicated in
multiple locations. For example, some of the RPC code could be simplified if it
consistently called logic through the same interface other components of the
code used.

Wholesale exposing the bulk of the logic currently composing the library could
be dangerous. It would bind users to Bitcoin Core's internal development. If
the code changes it may break their use case, or cause frequent re-bases. This
could place more pressure on Bitcoin Core developers making it even harder to
evolve the code. In the case of a future soft fork, users of the library would
have to carefully vet every data structure and function in case it changes
their logic. This would include low-level changes in Bitcoin Core's code that
might not be documented. If not done, continued usage could lead to a consensus
failure. A stable and safe API for external users is required to solve this.

Many changes to the internal validation code, such as making serialization more
performant, introducing new database formats, or further improving the
structure of the code, would not need to change the API. Development on Bitcoin
Core would remain flexible, while care for backward compatibility and
versioning would only have to be taken if the API is changed. Ensuring
backward compatibility of a C API is a long-established practice across
thousands of software projects. For example, if a function requires different
or more arguments after a soft fork, a newly tweaked version of the function
would be added to the API.

Most recently I opened [a pull
request](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30595) for an initial version
of an API for the library. It provides a C header (src/kernel/bitcoinkernel.h)
that external projects can use to access Bitcoin Core's validation logic
directly. Concretely this means the C header defines functions that call the
same code that executes when running a Bitcoin Core full node. The header not
only allows users to validate blocks, but also more low-level tasks, such as
reading block data and validating scripts, and in future iterations validating
headers and transactions. A more in-depth description of it is provided in the
pull request, and I have a
[rust-bitcoinkernel](https://github.com/sedited/rust-bitcoinkernel) crate
that links to it.

There are downsides to shipping a C header over a common C++ header as an
interface. With the bulk of Bitcoin Core's code being written in C++ there is a
need for a thin translation layer for translating it to C that will take
additional review and necessarily duplicate some code. The benefit of a C API
is that most other programming languages have mature C bindings, but often more
haphazard or no C++ bindings. C++ is also less stable. Newer features evolve
more rapidly and new standards are released every three years. Its choice could
place pressure on the project to adopt new language features and standards more
slowly to allow the ecosystem to update more slowly and retain some backward
compatibility.

Another downside of having a stable external C API is that it is not elegantly
usable directly by the existing internal code of Bitcoin Core. If it were it
would further complicate the code by adding yet another interface. Translating
from C++ to C back to C++ within the same codebase introduces needless
indirection. Not having a direct user of the API in Bitcoin Core could increase
maintenance burden, since problems with it are not readily noticed, or not
perceived as pressing. An example of this problem could be found in the now
deprecated libbitcoinconsensus, a library for validating just scripts. It took
nearly two years after the activation of taproot for [support to
land](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28539) in its API. A solution to
this could be writing some small utilities that use the API, like a block
linearizer, a reindexing tool, or a replacement of the existing
bitcoin-chainstate example program. Tests against the API may also help. A more
permanent solution could be moving any logic introduced by the API that goes
beyond just translating C++ types to C into a separate interface that may then
be reused by other parts of the code. Using your product within your
organisation is commonly referred to as
[dogfooding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eating_your_own_dog_food).

The C header could be used by external projects to re-implement a full node
while still relying on Bitcoin Core's validation code. This would greatly
reduce the risk of consensus bugs that re-writing the validation code could
otherwise introduce. Alternative Bitcoin full node implementations have run
into consensus / script validation bugs in their validation code, e.g.
[btcd](https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/cve-2024-38365-public-disclosure-btcd-findanddelete-bug/1184)
and [libbitcoin](https://github.com/libbitcoin/libbitcoin-system/issues/1526)
(though the libbitcoin bug was unreleased). It should be noted that libbitcoin
already optionally supports using the now deprecated libbitcoinconsensus (the
projects inconveniently have confusingly similar names, a choice that predates
me). Similarly
[floresta](https://github.com/vinteumorg/Floresta/blob/master/florestad/Cargo.toml#L21)
also uses libbitcoinconsensus for its script validation. Determining the amount
of API flexibility required to make this a success, even for highly optimized
and opinionated use cases, is difficult. For maximum efficiency users would be
forced to re-use the same data structure types that the library uses. At a
minimum, the library should leave "Bitcoin Core"-isms like
[assumevalid](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/88652/does-assumevalid-lower-the-security-of-bitcoin),
[assumeutxo](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/assumeutxo/), and transaction
policy configurable to the user. Alternative node implementations could
implement their own P2P, wallet, indexes, and UI functionality in any
programming language they see fit.

The library may also be useful for data science projects or index builders like
electrs that need to read block data, to not have to re-implement Bitcoin
Core's internal data representations. Bitcoin-Core's latest v28 release
introduced [XOR-ed block data
storage](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28052). This broke many
existing block data parsers, for example, the built-in one from
[mempool/electrs](https://github.com/mempool/electrs/pull/101). If they use the
kernel library in the future, they could instead of having to roll out a patch
just update to the newest version of the library and continue operations. When
I was writing my thesis a couple of years ago I also had to implement my own
Bitcoin Core data reader for collecting block and transaction data. It is
generally a bad idea for the ecosystem to rely on Bitcoin Core internal data
representations as opposed to a stable interface. Projects currently using the
JSON RPC interface to read block data from Bitcoin Core could use the kernel
library in the future. Reading directly from the filesystem through the kernel
is far more performant compared to serializing the data to JSON and sending it
over a socket.

The kernel library is called "a kernel" because, unlike many other libraries,
it manages resources, writes to disk, and spawns threads. It stores blocks and
maintains indexes for the block store and unspent outputs. It could be
beneficial to extend the API to become
[sans-I/O](https://sans-io.readthedocs.io/how-to-sans-io.html). Instead of
doing all the database operations internally, the library would allow the user
to define their own storage strategies. This could enable users to store data
in their own formats and database choices, or even leave everything in-memory.
Having abstract interfaces inside the code can also benefit testing. Unit and
fuzz tests would not have to touch any file system and the abstract interfaces
could be mocked to test their behaviour. However, there is bad history of
changing the database used for the consensus engine. When the database for
tracking the unspent outputs was changed in version 0.8 from Berkeley DB to
LevelDB a subsequent unanticipated change in the validation rules led to a
chain split, and a double spend (details in [BIP
50](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0050.mediawiki)).

Having a sans-I/O interface can enable the library to be targeted for platforms
that do not provide a full operating system. This could enable validation on
embedded devices, or, by compiling to Wasm, directly in the browser. Embedded
validation with a much-reduced storage requirement could be interesting for
projects like the [validating lightning
signer](https://gitlab.com/lightning-signer/validating-lightning-signer). More
recently there has been interest in the Bitcoin Core repository for compiling
some of the validation files to riscv-32 bit bare metal. This is the target
architecture used by the [risczero](https://risczero.com/) project to create a
zero-knowledge circuit from an arbitrary program. Being able to validate
blocks, headers, scripts, or transactions in zero-knowledge using the same
logic Bitcoin Core uses could give people more confidence in bridges like
[BitVM](https://bitvm.org/).

The project is by its very nature slow, incremental work. Coming up with an
ideal structure for everything and then implementing and submitting it all at
once is not workable, since it would bring too much risk. Instead, the path to
a good API will continue to be incremental and I expect it to be marked as
"experimental" for a while if it gets merged. I hope to eventually blog about
some of the topics mentioned here in detail. Especially C API design (a first
for me) was a topic I could not find many textbooks on. In contrast, I have
received a wealth of feedback on it from other developers, so it could be an
intriguing follow-up topic. So far the kernel project has met with a great deal
of charity and enthusiasm from existing Bitcoin Core contributors. This was
especially not a given since I took the project over from a prior contributor
who had an established contribution portfolio, while I was an infrequent
contributor with just a couple of pull requests to my name. I hope that
enthusiasm will not only carry over into the next stage but also motivate
external developers to take a look at the proposed API. I'm excited about this
phase of the project, and it will be interesting to see which parts will make
it and how. 

